@node MOTION EFFECTS
@section MOTION EFFECTS

@menu
* MOTION::            Motion tracking with rotation.
* MOTION 2 POINT::    Motion and rotation tracking from translation only.
* SUPER STABILIZER::  Basic stabilization
@end menu

@node MOTION
@subsection MOTION

The motion tracker is almost a complete application in itself.  The
motion tracker tracks two types of motion: translation and rotation. 
It can track both simultaneously or one only.  It can do 1/4 pixel
tracking or single pixel tracking.  It can stabilize motion or cause
one track to follow the motion of another track.

Although the motion tracker is applied as a realtime effect, it usually
must be rendered to see useful results.  The effect takes a long time
to precisely detect motion.

The motion tracker works by using one region of the frame as the region
to track.  It compares this region between 2 frames to calculate the
motion.  This region can be defined anywhere on the screen.  Once the
motion between 2 frames has been calculated, a number of things can be
done with that motion vector.  It can be scaled by a user value and
clamped to a maximum range.  It can be thrown away or accumulated with
all the motion vectors leading up to the current position.

To save time the motion result can be saved for later reuse, recalled
from a previous calculation, or discarded.

The motion tracker has a notion of 2 tracks, the master layer and the
target layer.  The master layer is where the comparison between 2
frames takes place.  The target layer is where motion is applied either
to track or compensate for the motion in the master layer.

The intricacies of motion tracking are enough to sustain entire
companies and build careers around.  The motion tracker in Cinelerra
isn't as sophisticated as some world class motion trackers but it's
enough to sweeten some camcorder footage.

Here is a brief description of the motion tracking parameters:


@b{Translation options:}

@itemize

@ignore
@item
@b{Track translation:} Enables translation operations.  
The motion tracker tracks X and Y motion in the master layer and 
adjusts X and Y motion in the target layer.
@end ignore

@item

@b{Translation search radius:} The size of the area to scan for the
translation block.

@item

@b{Translation block size:} For the translation operations, a block is
compared to a number of neighboring blocks to find the one with the
least difference.  The size of the block to search for is given by this
parameter.

@item @b{translation direction:} Determine if motion tracking is only
horizontal, vertical, or both

@ignore
@item
@b{Translation search steps:} Ideally the search operation would
compare the  translation block with every other pixel in the
translation search radius.  To  speed this operation up, a subset of
the total positions is searched.   Then the search area is narrowed and
rescanned by the same number of search steps until the motion is known
to 1/4 pixel accuracy.
@end ignore

@item

@b{Block X, Y:} These coordinates determine the center of the
translation  block based on percentages of the width and height of the
image.  The center of the block should be part of the image which is
visible at all times.

@item 

@b{Maximum absolute offset:} In @b{track previous frame} and @b{previous
frame same block} modes, the motion detected between every frame is
accumulated to form an absolute motion vector for the entire sequence. 
The amount of motion detected by the motion tracker is unlimited if this
is 100.  If it's under 100 the amount of motion is limited to that
percentage of the image size.  The value must be smaller for larger
@b{translation block sizes} so there is enough area under the block to
sense motion with.

@item

@b{Motion settling speed} In @b{track previous frame} and @b{previous frame
same block} modes, the motion detected between every frame is
accumulated to form an absolute motion vector for the entire sequence. 
To keep the absolute motion from exceeding limits, it can be
automatically reset over time by the settling speed.  If the settling
speed is 100 the absolute vector resets to 0 after every frame.  If the
settling speed is less than 100 the absolute vector is reduced slightly
before the next frame is added.
@end itemize

@b{Rotation options:}

@itemize
@item
@b{Track rotation:} Enables rotation operations.  The motion tracker
tracks rotation in the master layer and adjusts rotation in the target
layer.

@ignore
@item
@b{Rotation block size:} For rotation operations a single block is
compared to equally sized blocks, each rotated by a different amount. 
This is the size of the rotation block.
@end ignore

@item
@b{Rotation search radius:} This is the maximum angle of rotation from
the starting frame the rotation scanner can detect.  The rotation scan
is from this angle counterclockwise to this angle clockwise.  Thus the
rotation search radius is half the total range scanned.

@item
@b{Rotation center:} This is analogous to the block X/Y
coordinates but for rotation.  If the reference frame for rotation is
always offset by a constant angle & you only want it to detect the
difference between the constant rotation & the current rotation, use
this to take out the constant rotation.

@item
@b{Maximum angle offset:} 
This is analogous to the maximum offset for translation.

@item
@b{Rotation settling speed:} 
This is analogous to the settling speed for translation.

@ignore
@item
@b{Rotation search steps:} Ideally every possible angle would be tested
to get the rotation.  To speed up the rotation search, the rotation
search radius is divided into a finite number of angles and only those
angles compared to the starting frame.  Then the search radius is
narrowed and an equal number of angles is compared in the smaller
radius until the highest possible accuracy is achieved.

Normally you need one search step for every degree scanned.  Since the
rotation scanner scans the rotation search radius in two directions,
you need two steps for every degree in the search radius to search the
complete range.
@end ignore
@end itemize


@b{Global options:}

@itemize
@item

@b{Draw vectors:} When translation is enabled, 2 boxes are drawn on the
frame.  One box represents the translation block.  Another box outside
the translation block represents the extent of the translation search
radius.  In the center of these boxes is an arrow showing the
translation between the 2 master frames.

When rotation is enabled a single box the size of the rotation block is
drawn rotated by the amount of rotation detected.

@item

@b{Track single frame:} When this option is used the motion between a
single starting frame and the frame currently under the insertion point
is calculated.  The starting frame is specified in the @b{Frame number}
blank.  The motion calculated this way is taken as the absolute motion
vector.  The absolute motion vector for each frame replaces the
absolute motion vector for the previous frame.  Settling speed has no
effect on it since it doesn't contain any previous motion vectors. 
Playback can start anywhere on the timeline since there is no
dependence on previous results.

@item

@b{Track previous frame:} Causes only the motion between the previous
frame and the current frame to be calculated.  This is added to an
absolute motion vector to get the new motion from the start of the
sequence to the current position.  After every frame processed this
way, the block position is shifted to always cover the same region of
the image.  Playback must be started from the start of the motion
effect in order to accumulate all the necessary motion vectors.

@item

@b{Previous frame same block:} This is useful for stabilizing jerky
camcorder footage.  In this mode the motion between the previous frame
and the current frame is calculated.  Instead of adjusting the block
position to reflect the new location of the image, like Track Previous
Frame does, the block position is unchanged between each frame.  Thus a
new region is compared for each frame.

@item

@b{Master layer:} This determines the track which supplies the starting
frame and ending frame for the motion calculation.  If it's @b{Bottom}
the bottom track of all the tracks sharing this effect is the master
layer.  The top track of all the tracks is the target layer.

@item

@b{Calculation:} This determines whether to calculate the motion at all
and whether to save it to disk.  If it's @b{Don't Calculate} the motion
calculation is skipped.  If it's @b{Recalculate} the motion calculation
is performed every time each frame is rendered.  If it's @b{Save} the
motion calculation is always performed but a copy is also saved.  If
it's @b{Load}, the motion calculation is loaded from a previous save
calculation.  If there is no previous save calculation on disk, a new
motion calculation is performed.

@item

@b{Action:} Once the motion vector is known this determines whether to
move the target layer opposing the motion vector or following the
motion vector.  If it's @b{Do Nothing} the target layer is untouched. 
If it's @b{Track...} the target layer is moved by the same amount as
the master layer.  This is useful for matching titles to objects in the
frame.  If it's @b{Stabilize...} the target layer is moved opposite to
the motion vector.  This is useful for stabilizing an object in the
frame.  The motion operations can be accurate to single pixels or
subpixels by changing the action setting.





@end itemize



@menu
* SECRETS OF MOTION TRACKING::
* 2 PASS MOTION TRACKING::
* USING BLUR TO IMPROVE MOTION TRACKING::
* USING HISTOGRAM TO IMPROVE MOTION TRACKING::
* INTERPOLATING MOTION BETWEEN FRAMES::
* FILLING IN THE BLACK AREAS::
@end menu


@node SECRETS OF MOTION TRACKING
@subsubsection SECRETS OF MOTION TRACKING

Since it is a very slow effect, there is a method to applying the
motion tracker to get the most out of it.  First disable playback for
the track to do motion tracking on.  Then drop the effect on a region
of video with some motion to track.  Then rewind the insertion point to
the start of the region.  Set @b{Action} -> @b{Do Nothing}.  Set
@b{Calculation} -> @b{Don't calculate}.  Enable @b{Draw vectors}. Then
enable playback of the track to see the motion tracking areas.

Enable which of @b{translation motion} or @b{rotation motion} vectors
you want to track.  By watching the compositor window and adjusting the
@b{Block x,y} settings, center the block on the part of the image you
want to track.  Then set search radius, block size, and block
coordinates for translation and rotation.

Once this is configured, set the calculation to @b{Save coords} and do
test runs through the sequence to see if the motion tracker works and
to save the motion vectors.  Once this is done, disable playback for
the track, disable @b{Draw vectors}, set the motion action to perform
on the target layer and change the calculation to @b{Load coords}. 
Finally enable playback for the track.

When using a single starting frame to calculate the motion of a
sequence, the starting frame should be a single frame with the least
motion to any of the other frames.  This is rarely frame 0.  Usually
it's a frame near the middle of the sequence.  This way the search
radius need only reach halfway to the full extent of the motion in the
sequence.

If the motion tracker is used on a render farm, @b{Save coords} and
@b{previous frame} mode won't work.  The results of the save coords
operation are saved to the hard drives on the render nodes, not the
master node.  Future rendering operations on these nodes will process
different frames and read the wrong coordinates from the node
filesystems.  The fact that render nodes only visualize a portion of
the timeline also prevents @b{previous frame} from working since it
depends on calculating an absolute motion vector starting on frame 0.

@node 2 PASS MOTION TRACKING
@subsubsection 2 PASS MOTION TRACKING

The method described above is 2 pass motion tracking.  One pass is used
just to calculate the motion vectors.  A second pass is used to apply
the motion vectors to the footage.  This is faster than a single pass
because errors in the motion vector calculation can be discovered
quickly.

This also allows the motion tracking to use a less demanding colormodel
like RGB888 in the scanning step and a more demanding colormodel like
RGB Float in the action step.  The scanning step takes much longer than
action.

This suffers the disadvantage of not being practical for extremely long
sequences where some error is acceptable and the picture quality is
lousy to begin with, like stabilizing camcorder footage.

The slower method is to calculate the motion vectors and apply them
simultaneously.  This method can use one track as the motion vector
calculation track and another track as the target track for motion
vector actions.  This is useful for long sequences where some error is
acceptable.


@node USING BLUR TO IMPROVE MOTION TRACKING
@subsubsection USING BLUR TO IMPROVE MOTION TRACKING

With extremely noisy or interlaced footage, applying a blur effect
before the motion tracking can improve accuracy.  Either save the
motion vectors in a @b{tracking pass} and disable the blur for the
@b{action pass} or apply the blur just to the @b{master layer}.


@node USING HISTOGRAM TO IMPROVE MOTION TRACKING
@subsubsection USING HISTOGRAM TO IMPROVE MOTION TRACKING

A histogram is almost always applied before motion tracking to clamp
out noise in the darker pixels.  Either save the motion vectors in a
@b{tracking pass} and disable the histogram for the @b{action pass} or
apply the histogram just to the @b{master layer}.




@node INTERPOLATING MOTION BETWEEN FRAMES
@subsubsection INTERPOLATING MOTION BETWEEN FRAMES

The motion tracker can simulate higher frame rates than the media frame
rate by interpolating the motion.  Interpolation is enabled with the
@b{maximum absolute offset} and @b{settling speed} options.

First, go to @b{Settings->Format} in the main window and set the
@b{video frame rate} to a number higher than the media frame rate.

In the @b{Motion} window, select a tracking option which accumulates
motion.  This is either @b{Track previous frame} or @b{Previous frame
same block}.  These cause the @b{maximum absolute offset} and
@b{settling speed} options to take effect.

@b{maximum absolute offset} must be set to the maximum motion to be
accumulated as a percentage of the video size.  A value of 50 limits the
motion to 50% of the video size.  50 works well.  The value must be
smaller for larger @b{translation block sizes} so there is enough area
under the block to sense motion with.

@b{settling speed} must be set to the rate at which the accumulated
motion resets to 0 over time.  The reset happens whether or not any
motion was detected, so when the project frame rate is higher than the
media frame rate, the frames between media frames regress towards the
center.  For interpolated motion, the @b{settling speed} value should be
small, so the movement is smooth.  3 works well.









@node FILLING IN THE BLACK AREAS
@subsubsection FILLING IN THE BLACK AREAS

Stabilization always creates black borders in the track resolution.  One
solution is to shrink the project resolution so the borders are always
cropped off the output.  Another solution is to apply a @b{Time Average}
effect after stabilization.

Configure @b{Time Average} the following way:

@itemize
@item
@b{Frame count:} 1
@item
@b{Accumulate sequence again:} No
@item
@b{Replace:} Yes
@item
@b{Threshold:} 1
@item
@b{Border:} 4
@end itemize

This makes new frames replace only the pixels in the previous frames
where there is new data.  The black areas in new frames don't replace
previous data so the previous data shows through and fills them in.












@node MOTION 2 POINT
@subsection MOTION 2 POINT


The 2 point motion tracker is the same as using 2 of the translation
motion trackers to track 2 points.  It doesn't have a rotation tracker. 
Instead, it uses the angle between the 2 translation points to
determine  rotation.  The 2 points can be enabled separately.

If 1 point is enabled, only translation is tracked.  

If 2 points are enabled, translation is tracked by point 1 and rotation
is tracked by point 2.  Stabilization is performed with point 1 as the center.

The other parameters for the 2 point tracker are the same as the single
point tracker.  In addition, the 2 point tracker supports @b{TRANSLATION
SEARCH OFFSET}.

@b{TRANSLATION SEARCH OFFSET} forces the motion search to look in a
region other than directly next to the translation block position.  The
@b{translation search offset} is added to the new search result, giving
contiguous motion results throughout any changes in translation search area.

This is useful if the camera position changed in the middle of a
sequence of images but the subject stayed the same.  Offset the
translation search area when the camera position changes and the
detected motion stays contiguous through the entire sequence.

2 point tracking works best if the points don't change shape between
frames.  It is more prone to rotation errors than single point motion
tracking if the points change shape.  2 point tracking is mainly used
for tracking stars.

Use the smallest search blocks possible since larger blocks are harder
to compare when they're rotated.




@node SUPER STABILIZER
@subsection SUPER STABILIZER

New techniques specifically for stabilizing video emerged.  The previous
motion effects were quite large so a new effect was created just for
stabilizing video.  It's not intended to be accurate as much as make
footage look good.

The key step it does is read ahead by a certain number of frames to
determine the future drift of the motion estimation.  Then it
interpolates every frame to take out the future drift.  This has proven
superior to centering on past accumulated motion over time.  It hides
oscillating motion.  If it knows a future motion is going to be the
opposite of a past motion, it can avoid centering on the past motion.

The main drawback with super stabilizer is it's super slow.  To use it,
disable the play toggle for the track, then attach it.  Disable
@b{Enable} in the super stabilizer.  Then enable the play toggle for the
track.  Enable @b{Draw vectors} to configure the super stabilizer.  Once
configured, enable @b{Enable} & wait for the lookahead buffer to fill.

Super stabilizer uses a single search block & only detects motion after
the previous frame.  There is no maximum setting for the accumulated
drift because the lookahead buffer will always keep it from drifting no
farther than where it is in the future.  Because the accumulated drift
heads toward infinity, it's not practical to have a maximum accumulated
drift.

Like the other motion effects, best results depend on the search block
having enough details & not having repeating patterns.

@b{Enable} Enables processing for the super stabilizer.  Does not affect
the drawing of the vectors.  Disable it to configure the effect.

@b{Number of frames to look ahead} the size of the lookahead buffer. 
All these frames are stored in RAM.  The longer it is, the more stable
the footage but the longer it takes to get started until it's unusable.

@b{Translation search radius} How far to search around the search block.

@b{Translation block size} How big the search block is.

@b{Block position} Where the search area is.

@b{Track rotation} Rotation tracking is optional

@b{Maximum angle offset} How far to search for the rotation.

@b{Draw vectors} Draws the search block to allow configuration.


