
@node CREATING A NEW PROJECT
@chapter CREATING A NEW PROJECT

There are 2 ways to create a new project: going to @b{File->New} or
loading new files @xref{LOADING FILES}.  Once a new project is
created, all the parameters can be changed later without creating a new
project.  


@menu
* USING FILE->NEW::
* CHANGING PARAMETERS AFTER LOADING::
@end menu



@node USING FILE->NEW
@section USING FILE->NEW

One way is to go to @b{File->New}.  This merely clears the EDL & creates
a blank timeline with the project settings previously defined in
@b{settings->format}.  There was originally a dialiog for new, but it
was never used.  The number of tracks created depends on the last file
loaded.  It's proven easiest to create the needed tracks with the Audio
& Video menus.



@node CHANGING PARAMETERS AFTER LOADING
@section CHANGING PARAMETERS AFTER LOADING

After a project is created, you can use the set format dialog to change
parameters without deleting the project.  Go to @b{Settings->Set
format}.  The sections of the dialog are described here:

@itemize

@item

@b{Presets} - Select an option from this menu to have all the project
settings set to one of the known standards.

@item
@b{Audio -> Tracks} - Sets the number of audio tracks the new project
should have.  Tracks can be added or deleted later, but options are
provided here for convenience.

@item
@b{Audio -> Channels} - Sets the number of audio channels the new
project should have.  The number of audio channels doesn't have to be
the same as the number of tracks.

@item
@b{Audio -> Samplerate} - Sets the samplerate of the audio.  The
project samplerate doesn't have to be the same as the media sample rate
that you load.  Media is resampled to match the project sample rate.

@item
@b{Video -> Tracks} - Sets the number of video tracks the new project
should have.  Tracks can be added or deleted later, but options are
provided here for convenience.

@item
@b{Video -> Framerate} - Sets the framerate of the video.  The project
framerate doesn't have to be the same as the media frame rate that you
load.  Media is reframed to match the project framerate.

@item
@b{Video -> Canvas size} - Sets the size of the video output.  Each
track also has its own frame size.  Initially the @b{New} dialog
creates video tracks whose sizes all match the video output, but the
video track sizes can be changed later without changing the video
output.

@item
@b{Video -> Aspect ratio} - Sets the aspect ratio.  The aspect ratio is
applied to the video output.  The aspect ratio can be different than
the number of horizontal pixels / the number of vertical pixels. 
Setting a different aspect ratio than the number of pixels results in
nonsquare pixels.

@item
@b{Video -> Auto aspect ratio} - If this is checked, the @b{New} dialog
always recalculates the @b{Aspect ratio} setting when the @b{Canvas
size} is changed.  This ensures pixels are always square.

@item 
@b{Video -> Color model} - This sets the color model video intermediates
in the project will be stored in.  Color models are described in a 
separate section @xref{COLOR MODEL}.

@end itemize


More about this section is discussed in @xref{SETTING PROJECT
ATTRIBUTES}.


