

@node TROUBLESHOOTING
@chapter TROUBLESHOOTING


@menu
* BUZ DRIVER CRASHES::
* DRAGGING IN AND OUT POINTS DOESN'T WORK::
* LOCKING UP WHEN LOADING FILES::
* SYNCHRONIZATION LOST WHILE RECORDING::
* APPLYING LINEARIZE FOLLOWED BY BLUR DOESN'T WORK::
@end menu

@node BUZ DRIVER CRASHES
@section BUZ DRIVER CRASHES

First, Zoran capture boards must be accessed using the @b{Buz} video
driver in @b{Preferences->Recording} and @b{Preferences->Playback}. 
Some performance tweeks are available in another section. 
@xref{IMPROVING PERFORMANCE}.

Once tweeked, the Buz driver seems to crash if the number of recording
buffers is too high.  Make sure @b{Preferences->Recording->Frames to
buffer in device} is below 10.


@node DRAGGING IN AND OUT POINTS DOESN'T WORK
@section DRAGGING IN AND OUT POINTS DOESN'T WORK


Sometimes there will be two edits really close together.  The point
selected for dragging may be next to the indended edit on an edit too
small to see at the current zoom level.  Zoom in horizontally.



@node LOCKING UP WHEN LOADING FILES
@section LOCKING UP WHEN LOADING FILES


The most common reason loading files locks up is because the codec
isn't supported.  Another reason is because Cinelerra is building
picons for the Resources window.  If you load a large number of images,
it needs to decompress every single image to build a picon.  Go into
settings->preferences->interface and disable @b{Use thumbnails in
resource window} to skip this process.





@node SYNCHRONIZATION LOST WHILE RECORDING
@section SYNCHRONIZATION LOST WHILE RECORDING

If the framerate of the recording is much lower than the framerate of
the source, the video will accumulate in the recording buffers over
time while the audio and video are well out of sync.  Decrease the
@b{number of frames to buffer in the device} in
@b{preferences->recording} so the excess frames are dropped instead of
buffered.

@node APPLYING LINEARIZE FOLLOWED BY BLUR DOESN'T WORK
@section APPLYING LINEARIZE FOLLOWED BY BLUR DOESN'T WORK

The linearize effect uses the pow function while the blur effect uses a
number of exp functions in the math library.  For some reason, using
the pow function breaks later calls to the exp functions in the math
library.  You need to apply linearize after blur to get it to work.





